BUI - Replace Surface system with Bg (neutral background) system (#32711)
backstage/backstage: .changeset/clean-bags-occur.md

---
'@backstage/ui': minor
---

**BREAKING**: Replaced `Surface` / `onSurface` system with new `Bg` background system

The old `Surface` type (`'0'`–`'3'`, `'auto'`) and its associated props (`surface`, `onSurface`) have been replaced by a new `Bg` type with semantic neutral levels (`'neutral-1'` through `'neutral-4'`) and intents (`'danger'`, `'warning'`, `'success'`). Leaf components like Button no longer need an explicit prop — backgrounds auto-increment from parent context.

New `useBg` hook and `BgProvider` replace the deleted `useSurface` hook and `SurfaceProvider`.

**Migration:**

Rename the `surface` prop to `bg` on container components and update values:

```diff
- <Box surface="1">
+ <Box bg="neutral-1">

- <Card surface="2">
+ <Card bg="neutral-2">

- <Flex surface="0">
+ <Flex bg="neutral-1">

- <Grid.Root surface="1">
+ <Grid.Root bg="neutral-1">
```

> Remove `onSurface` from leaf components — it is now fully automatic:

Reviewer: Another mention of "fully automatic".

Reviewer: Should this be rephrased now? It's not more or less automatic than it was before, you just can't override the container value anymore, right?

```diff
- <Button onSurface="1" variant="secondary">
+ <Button variant="secondary">

- <ButtonIcon onSurface="2" variant="secondary" />
+ <ButtonIcon variant="secondary" />

- <ToggleButton onSurface="1">
+ <ToggleButton>
```

Alert no longer accepts a `surface` prop (its background is driven by `status`):

```diff
- <Alert surface="1" status="info" />
+ <Alert status="info" />
```

Update type imports:

```diff
- import type { Surface, LeafSurfaceProps, ContainerSurfaceProps } from '@backstage/ui';
+ import type { Bg } from '@backstage/ui';
```

Replace hook usage in custom components:

```diff
- import { useSurface, SurfaceProvider } from '@backstage/ui';
+ import { useBg, BgProvider } from '@backstage/ui';

- const { surface } = useSurface({ surface: props.surface });
+ const { bg } = useBg({ mode: 'container', bg: props.bg });

- const { surface } = useSurface({ onSurface: props.onSurface });
+ const { bg } = useBg({ mode: 'leaf' });
```

> **Affected components:** box, button, button-icon, button-link, toggle-button, card, alert, flex, grid

Author: Done

New `useBg` hook and `BgProvider` replace the deleted `useSurface` hook and `SurfaceProvider`.

**Migration:**

Rename the `surface` prop to `bg` on container components and update values:

```diff
- <Box surface="1">
+ <Box bg="neutral-1">

- <Card surface="2">
+ <Card bg="neutral-2">

- <Flex surface="0">
+ <Flex bg="neutral-1">

- <Grid.Root surface="1">
+ <Grid.Root bg="neutral-1">
```

Remove `onSurface` from leaf components — it is now fully automatic:

```diff
- <Button onSurface="1" variant="secondary">
+ <Button variant="secondary">

- <ButtonIcon onSurface="2" variant="secondary" />
+ <ButtonIcon variant="secondary" />

- <ToggleButton onSurface="1">
+ <ToggleButton>
```

> Alert no longer accepts a `surface` prop (its background is driven by `status`):

Author: You're right. I moved it to a new changeset

+ <Flex bg="neutral-1">

- <Grid.Root surface="1">
+ <Grid.Root bg="neutral-1">
```

Remove `onSurface` from consumer components — they now always inherit from the parent container:

```diff
- <Button onSurface="1" variant="secondary">
+ <Button variant="secondary">

- <ButtonIcon onSurface="2" variant="secondary" />
+ <ButtonIcon variant="secondary" />

- <ToggleButton onSurface="1">
+ <ToggleButton>
```

Update type imports:

```diff
- import type { Surface, LeafSurfaceProps, ContainerSurfaceProps } from '@backstage/ui';
+ import type { ContainerBg, ProviderBg } from '@backstage/ui';
```

Replace hook usage in custom components:

```diff
- import { useSurface, SurfaceProvider } from '@backstage/ui';
+ import { useBgProvider, useBgConsumer, BgProvider } from '@backstage/ui';

- const { surface } = useSurface({ surface: props.surface });
+ const { bg } = useBgProvider(props.bg);

- const { surface } = useSurface({ onSurface: props.onSurface });
+ const { bg } = useBgConsumer();
```

Update CSS selectors targeting surface data attributes:

```diff
- [data-surface='1'] { ... }
+ [data-bg='neutral-1'] { ... }

- [data-on-surface='1'] { ... }
+ [data-on-bg='neutral-1'] { ... }
```

> Note: Provider components use `data-bg` (values: `neutral-1` through `neutral-3`, plus intents). Consumer components use `data-on-bg`, which reflects the parent container's bg directly (no auto-increment).

Reviewer: Fix Vale error and rephrase slightly:

```suggestion
Note: Provider components use `data-bg` (values: `neutral-1` through `neutral-3`, plus intents). Consumer components use `data-on-bg`, which reflects the closest provider component's `bg`.
```
